3GPP TS 33.501 V17.9.0
Security architecture and procedures for 5G System
Release 17

NOTE ON THIS FILE: This is a condensed excerpt prepared for demonstration and
testing of the retrieval pipeline. It preserves 3GPP clause numbering and
terminology but is not the complete normative text. For normative use, consult
the official publication at https://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.501/

1 Scope
The present document specifies the security architecture, that is, the security features and the security mechanisms for the 5G System and the 5G Core, and the security procedures performed within the 5G System including the 5G Core and the 5G New Radio.

4 Overview of security architecture

4.1 Security domains
The following security domains are defined:
Network access security: the set of security features that enable a UE to authenticate and access services via the network securely, including the 3GPP access and non-3GPP access, and in particular to protect against attacks on the radio interfaces.
Network domain security: the set of security features that enable network nodes to securely exchange signalling data and user plane data.
User domain security: the set of security features that secure the user access to mobile equipment.
Application domain security: the set of security features that enable applications in the user domain and in the provider domain to exchange messages securely.
SBA domain security: the set of security features that enables network functions of the SBA architecture to securely communicate within the serving network domain and with other network domains.
Visibility and configurability of security: the set of features that enables the user to be informed whether a security feature is in operation.

5 Security requirements and features

5.1 General security requirements

5.1.1 Requirements on the UE
Subscriber identifier privacy: the SUPI should not be transferred in clear text over NG-RAN except routing information, for example the Mobile Country Code and Mobile Network Code. The Home Network Public Key shall be stored in the USIM. The protection scheme identifier shall be stored in the USIM. The UE shall support the null-scheme.

Subscriber identifier de-concealing: the SUCI shall be de-concealed by the UDM using the home network private key.

5.2 Requirements on the gNB
The gNB shall support ciphering and integrity protection of user plane data between the UE and the gNB. The gNB shall implement the following ciphering algorithms: NEA0, 128-NEA1, 128-NEA2. The gNB may implement 128-NEA3. The gNB shall implement the following integrity protection algorithms: NIA0, 128-NIA1, 128-NIA2. The gNB may implement 128-NIA3.

The user plane data ciphering and integrity protection between the UE and the gNB shall be started after the RRC security mode command procedure has been completed. Keys stored inside the gNB shall never leave a secure environment within the gNB.

6 Security procedures between UE and 5G network functions

6.1 Primary authentication and key agreement

6.1.1 Authentication framework

6.1.1.1 General
The purpose of the primary authentication and key agreement procedures is to enable mutual authentication between the UE and the network and provide keying material that can be used between the UE and the serving network in subsequent security procedures. The keying material generated by the primary authentication and key agreement procedure results in an anchor key called the KSEAF provided by the AUSF of the home network to the SEAF of the serving network.

6.1.1.2 Authentication methods
Two authentication methods are supported for primary authentication in the 5G System: 5G AKA and EAP-AKA'. Both 5G AKA and EAP-AKA' shall be supported by the UE and the serving network for 3GPP access. The home network operator decides which authentication method is selected, based on the SUPI and the subscription data.

6.1.3 Authentication procedures

6.1.3.1 Authentication procedure for EAP-AKA'
EAP-AKA' is specified in RFC 5448. The UDM/ARPF first generates an authentication vector with the Authentication Management Field separation bit set to 1. The UDM/ARPF then computes CK' and IK' and replaces CK and IK by CK' and IK'. The AUSF sends the EAP-Request/AKA'-Challenge message to the SEAF in a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message.

6.1.3.2 Authentication procedure for 5G AKA
5G AKA enhances EPS AKA by providing the home network with proof of successful authentication of the UE from the visited network. The UDM/ARPF shall generate an authentication vector with the AMF separation bit set to 1, then derive KAUSF and calculate the expected response XRES*. The UDM/ARPF creates a 5G Home Environment Authentication Vector from RAND, AUTN, XRES* and KAUSF.

Upon receiving the RES* from the UE, the SEAF shall compute HRES* from RES* and compare it with the HXRES* received from the AUSF. If they coincide, the SEAF shall consider the authentication successful from the serving network point of view. The SEAF then sends the RES* to the AUSF, which compares it with the stored XRES*. If they are equal, the AUSF considers the authentication as successful from the home network point of view and informs the UDM about the authentication result.

6.1.3.3 Linking increased home control to subsequent procedures
The authentication confirmation provided by the home network in 5G AKA allows the home network to be aware that the UE has been successfully authenticated in a serving network, which mitigates certain classes of fraud where a visited network claims to serve a subscriber that is not present.

6.2 Key hierarchy, key derivation and distribution scheme

6.2.1 Key hierarchy
The key hierarchy includes the following keys: KAUSF, KSEAF, KAMF, KNASint, KNASenc, KN3IWF, KgNB, KRRCint, KRRCenc, KUPint and KUPenc.

Keys for AUSF: KAUSF is a key derived by the ME and the AUSF from CK and IK for 5G AKA, or from CK' and IK' for EAP-AKA'.
Key for the SEAF: KSEAF is an anchor key derived by the ME and the AUSF from KAUSF.
Key for the AMF: KAMF is a key derived by the ME and the SEAF from KSEAF.
Keys for NAS signalling: KNASint is a key derived by the ME and the AMF from KAMF, which shall only be used for the protection of NAS signalling with a particular integrity algorithm. KNASenc is a key derived by the ME and the AMF from KAMF, which shall only be used for the protection of NAS signalling with a particular encryption algorithm.
Key for NG-RAN: KgNB is a key derived by the ME and the AMF from KAMF. The KgNB is further used for the derivation of keys for the RRC signalling and the UP traffic.
Keys for UP traffic: KUPenc is a key derived by the ME and the gNB from KgNB, which shall only be used for the protection of UP traffic with a particular encryption algorithm. KUPint is a key derived by the ME and the gNB from KgNB, which shall only be used for the protection of UP traffic between the ME and the gNB with a particular integrity algorithm.
Keys for RRC signalling: KRRCint and KRRCenc are keys derived by the ME and the gNB from KgNB.
Key for non-3GPP access: KN3IWF is a key derived by the ME and the AMF from KAMF for the non-3GPP access.

6.2.2 Key derivation
All key derivations for 5G are performed using the key derivation function specified in TS 33.220 Annex B. The ABBA parameter is used to provide anti-bidding down protection of security features between different generations and different serving network types. The ABBA parameter shall be included in the derivation of KAMF from KSEAF.

6.3 Security contexts

6.3.1 Distribution of subscriber identities and security data within one 5G serving network
The AMF shall only transfer a 5G security context to another AMF within the same serving network. When a UE moves between AMFs, the source AMF may transfer the 5G security context to the target AMF, and the target AMF may perform a horizontal key derivation to obtain a new KAMF.

6.4 NAS security mechanisms

6.4.2 Security for multiple NAS connections
When the UE is registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access in the same PLMN, a single 5G NAS security context is used with two separate pairs of NAS COUNTs, one pair per access type. Each access type has its own uplink and downlink NAS COUNT.

6.4.3 NAS integrity mechanisms
The NAS integrity protection shall be applied to all NAS messages except those explicitly listed as exceptions. The use of NIA0 for integrity protection is only allowed for unauthenticated emergency sessions. The UE shall implement NIA0, 128-NIA1 and 128-NIA2, and may implement 128-NIA3.

6.4.4 NAS confidentiality mechanisms
The UE shall implement NEA0, 128-NEA1 and 128-NEA2 for confidentiality protection of NAS signalling, and may implement 128-NEA3. Confidentiality protection of NAS signalling is optional to use.

6.5 RRC security mechanisms
RRC integrity protection shall be applied to all RRC messages except those explicitly listed as exceptions. Replay protection shall be activated when integrity protection is activated. Integrity protection of RRC signalling is mandatory to use except for unauthenticated emergency calls.

6.6 UP security mechanisms
The gNB shall activate the user plane confidentiality and integrity protection per DRB according to the security policy received from the SMF. The User Plane Security Enforcement information provides the NG-RAN with User Plane security policies for a PDU session, indicating whether UP integrity protection and UP confidentiality protection are Required, Preferred or Not needed.

6.12 Security algorithm identifiers
The following ciphering algorithms are defined:
"0000" NEA0 Null ciphering algorithm
"0001" 128-NEA1 128-bit SNOW 3G based algorithm
"0010" 128-NEA2 128-bit AES based algorithm
"0011" 128-NEA3 128-bit ZUC based algorithm

The following integrity algorithms are defined:
"0000" NIA0 Null Integrity Protection algorithm
"0001" 128-NIA1 128-bit SNOW 3G based algorithm
"0010" 128-NIA2 128-bit AES based algorithm
"0011" 128-NIA3 128-bit ZUC based algorithm

128-NEA1 and 128-NIA1 are based on SNOW 3G. 128-NEA2 and 128-NIA2 are based on 128-bit AES, in CTR mode for ciphering and in CMAC mode for integrity. 128-NEA3 and 128-NIA3 are based on ZUC.

6.9 Security handling in mobility

6.9.2 Key handling in handover
At handover, the source gNB derives a KgNB* using either a horizontal key derivation, based on the currently active KgNB, or a vertical key derivation, based on a fresh NH parameter received from the AMF. The NCC associated with the KgNB* is delivered to the UE so that the UE can determine which derivation was used.

6.9.4 Key handling at state transitions
On transition from RRC_INACTIVE to RRC_CONNECTED, the UE and the gNB derive a new KgNB using the stored NH or the current KgNB together with the target PCI and target ARFCN-DL.

6.12.1 Requirements for algorithm selection
The serving network shall select the algorithms to use dependent on the UE security capabilities of the UE and the configured allowed list of security algorithms of the serving network entity. The UE security capabilities shall be sent to the network in an initial NAS message, and the network shall echo them back in an integrity protected message so that bidding-down attacks can be detected.

Annex C (normative): Protection schemes for the concealment of the SUPI

C.1 Introduction
The SUCI is computed by the UE from the SUPI using a protection scheme. The protection schemes defined in this annex are the null-scheme, Profile A and Profile B. The home network operator may also define proprietary protection schemes.

C.2 Null-scheme
The null-scheme shall be implemented by the UE and by the home network. The null-scheme returns the same output as its input, that is, the SUPI is not concealed. The null-scheme shall only be used when the home network has not provisioned a public key, or for unauthenticated emergency sessions.

C.3 Elliptic Curve Integrated Encryption Scheme
The Elliptic Curve Integrated Encryption Scheme is used for the concealment of the SUPI. ECIES combines an elliptic curve key agreement with a symmetric cipher and a message authentication code.

C.3.4 Profile A
Profile A uses Curve25519 for the elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman primitive, the key derivation function ANSI-X9.63-KDF with SHA-256, AES-128 in CTR mode as the symmetric cipher, and HMAC-SHA-256 truncated to 64 bits as the MAC function. The point compression for Profile A is not applicable, and the public key size is 32 octets.

C.3.4a Profile B
Profile B uses the elliptic curve secp256r1 for the elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman primitive, the key derivation function ANSI-X9.63-KDF with SHA-256, AES-128 in CTR mode as the symmetric cipher, and HMAC-SHA-256 truncated to 64 bits as the MAC function. Point compression is used, and the compressed public key size is 33 octets.

13 Security for service based interfaces

13.1 Protection at the transport layer
TLS shall be used for transport layer protection within a PLMN unless network security is provided by other means. All network functions shall support TLS. Both server-side certificates and client-side certificates shall be supported.

13.2 Authentication and authorization between network functions
The NRF and the NF shall authenticate each other during discovery, registration and access token request. The OAuth 2.0 authorization framework is used, where the NRF acts as the OAuth 2.0 authorization server, the NF Service Consumer acts as the OAuth 2.0 client, and the NF Service Producer acts as the OAuth 2.0 resource server.

13.5 Protection across PLMN interconnect
The Security Edge Protection Proxy is a network function at the perimeter of the PLMN that protects control plane traffic exchanged between PLMNs over the N32 interface. The N32 interface is split into N32-c, used for the initial handshake between SEPPs, and N32-f, used to forward the actual JSON payloads. The PRINS protocol provides application layer security on N32-f, allowing intermediate IPX providers to modify specific information elements while the integrity of the remaining content is preserved.
